# DoS attacks resilience

_This page is at the same time a small guide explaining how to handle DoS attacks, and explains the motivation behind some design decisions._

A denial-of-service (DoS) attack consists in consuming all the resources (bandwidth, disk I/O, CPU, or memory) of the target in order to prevent the target from properly serving legitimate users. It is possible to mitigate a DoS attack by identifying the attackers and filtering them out, but this is never done by the final JSON-RPC server that actually processes requests. From the point of view of the final JSON-RPC server, a DoS attack is the same thing as being under very heavy load.

Because the resources available to the target are bounded, it is fundamentally impossible to claim to be able to resist to all DoS attacks. It is, however, possible to optimize and properly distribute resources consumption in order to increase the load that the target is capable of handling.

Additionally, and maybe more importantly, it is important to guarantee a good quality of service even when under heavy load.

## Bounded queues

In order to provide a good quality of service, the time between the moment a request is received by the server and the moment the response is sent back must be short. In order to achieve this, the CPU operations and I/O operations needed to handle the request must not take too much time. The only way to guarantee this is by limiting the number of CPU or I/O operations that can be performed concurrently. As an example, if you try to read 5000 files at once, some of these file reads will take a long time, and the only way to guarantee that any file read is always short is to not start too many at the same time.

This is generally achieved by creating a certain number of threads (lightweight or not) dedicated to handling a specific CPU or I/O operation. By doing so, you are guaranteed that the number of these CPU or I/O operations that are being executed simultaneously will never exceed the number of threads dedicated to them. When an operation needs to be performed, it is put in a FIFO queue in order to be picked up by these threads. It is important for the sizes of all queues to be bounded, in order for memory usage to be bounded as well, and as otherwise operations could take a long time being stuck in a queue.

Queues should be bounded such that, even when they are nearly full, the time between the moment when an operation enters the queue and the moment when it is processed is reasonable. A bound that is too low can potentially lead to a decrease in performance due to an excess of context switches, but this is in practice rarely a problem.

When a queue of operations is full, the dispatcher should simply wait for some space to be available. This is called _back-pressure_, as the dispatcher is intentionally slowed down as well. If the dispatcher is itself responsible for processing some operations in a queue, this processing is paused, and that queue is slowed down as well, which might cause more back-pressure to be propagated elsewhere.

This back-pressure must be propagated all the way to the TCP socket. When the code receiving requests from the TCP socket is unable to move forward because a queue is full, it should in turn stop receiving data from the TCP socket. This will in turn cause the Linux kernel to not increase the TCP window size, which propagates the back-pressure to the JSON-RPC client, slowing down this JSON-RPC client.

In multiplexing situations, where multiple threads (lightweight or not) all try to insert elements in a single bounded queue, it is important for the distribution of items to have an acceptable distribution. It must not happen that some threads are able to insert elements very quickly while some others need to sleep for a long time before their element is inserted.

Thanks to all these mechanisms, the amount of CPU and I/O consumed by all JSON-RPC clients connected to the server combined is bounded and uniformly distributed between each JSON-RPC client, guaranteeing that they are equally slowed down. In order to guarantee a good quality of service to these clients, the final step is simply to limit the number of JSON-RPC clients that are allowed to connect. The precise limit depends on the capabilities of the machine running the JSON-RPC server.

## Dispatching a notification shouldn't wait

Some JSON-RPC functions in the API let clients subscribe to some events, such as a new block, meaning that the server must send a notification to the client when that specific event happens.

One important thing to keep in mind is that these events, generated by the blockchain node, shouldn't be back-pressured. We do not want to slow down for example the reception of blocks by the node because the JSON-RPC server isn't capable of following the rhythm.

The events coming from the blockchain node can be seen as a stream. This stream can briefly be back-pressured, but ideally as little as possible. Whatever threads are on the receiving side of this stream of events should therefore consist only of CPU-only non-blocking operations.

However, sending a message to a JSON-RPC client might take a long time, in case the client has (intentionally or not) little bandwidth. The threads that are receiving the stream of events should never wait for a client to be ready to accept more data before sending a notification to it. If the client isn't ready, then the notification must either be added to a send queue or simply discarded. Because queues must be bounded, it is unavoidable to sometimes have to discard some notifications.

Consequently, all functions that consist in sending notifications must be designed having in mind that the queue of notifications to send out must be bounded to a certain value. For example, the queue of notifications for `transactionWatch_unstable_submitAndWatch` must have a size of 3. When the queue is full, new notifications must overwrite the notifications already in the queue. The design of all JSON-RPC functions should take into account the fact that this shouldn't result in a loss of important information for the JSON-RPC client.

## Distinguishing between light and heavy calls

When implementing bounded queues, one should avoid a situation where some elements in the queue are very quick to be processed while some others very slow.

During normal operations one will decide on the size of the queue and number of processing threads based on the average time it takes to process a queue element, but during a DoS attack the attacker can deliberately push a larger number of elements that are heavy to process. For example, with a single queue of incoming JSON-RPC requests, an attacker can intentionally submit requests that take a long time to process, in order to fill the queue more quickly.

For this reason, it is a good idea to sometimes split some queues, where light operations go on one queue and heavy operations on a different one.

This is part of the reason why JSON-RPC functions are split by groups. In particular, the `archive`-prefixed JSON-RPC functions are, due to their disk access, considered as heavy and should be processed on a different queue than the other JSON-RPC functions. Under heavy load, it is likely that the processing of `archive`-prefixed JSON-RPC functions will be slowed down a lot, while the processing of other functions will be less impacted.

## Enforced limits

In order to limit the memory consumption and the latency of processing requests, it is important that requests that involve storing some state on the JSON-RPC server in the long term are subject to limits.

In particular:

- The number of JSON-RPC clients simultaneously connected must be bounded.
- The number of active subscriptions (i.e. where the server sends a notification to the client when something happens) must be bounded.
- The number of pinned blocks (in the context of `chainHead_unstable_follow`) must be bounded.

The limits on the number of active subscriptions and pinned block should be enforced per client, as it would be undesirable to limit the number of subscriptions/pinned blocks available to some clients just because other clients are using a lot of them. Since the number of clients is bounded, enforcing these limits per client also automatically enforces these limits globally.

Note that the limit on the number of JSON-RPC clients simultaneously connected should be enforced by rejecting new clients with a 503 status code, rather than for example closing the TCP socket altogether. This makes it possible for other software in front of the JSON-RPC server, such as a load balancer, to understand what the problem is.
